README overhaul (#11)
redolution/iplboot: README.md

A minimal GameCube IPL

> IPLBoot will attempt to load DOLs from the following locations in order:

Author: Apologizes on getting the branding wrong. Will update.

 D-Up        | `/up.dol`

If no DOL can be loaded, IPLBoot will boot the official IPL (GameCube intro and menu) instead.

For example, this configuration would boot straight into Swiss by default, or GBI if you held B, or the typical GameCube intro if you held any other button:
- `/ipl.dol` - Swiss
- `/b.dol` - GBI

This configuration would boot into the typical GameCube intro by default, or Swiss if you held Z, or GBI if you held B:
- `/z.dol` - Swiss
- `/b.dol` - GBI

**Pro-tip:** You can prevent files from showing in Swiss by marking them as hidden files on the SD card.

If you hold multiple buttons, the highest in the table takes priority. Also note that all directions are D-Pad buttons, *not* joysticks. Careful not to touch any of the analog controls (sticks and triggers) when powering on as this is when they are calibrated.

**Something not working?** See the [troubleshooting section](#troubleshooting).

## Usage

Download the designated appropriate file for your device from the [latest release](https://github.com/redolution/iplboot/releases/latest).

Prepare your SD card by copying DOLs onto the SD card and renaming them according the table above.

### PicoBoot

> You can download ready-to-go firmware featuring IPLBoot directly from PicoBoot. Just follow the [installation guide](https://github.com/webhdx/PicoBoot#-installation-guide). This is likely what you want.

Author: The guide that is linked to includes instructions on where and what to download. I'd rather PicoBoot maintain that.

> You can download ready-to-go firmware featuring IPLBoot directly from PicoBoot. Just follow the [installation guide](https://github.com/webhdx/PicoBoot#-installation-guide). This is likely what you want.

Author: The linked installation guide has instructions on where and what to download. I'd rather not maintain that info here.

> You can download ready-to-go firmware featuring IPLBoot directly from PicoBoot. Just follow the [installation guide](https://github.com/webhdx/PicoBoot#-installation-guide). This is likely what you want.

Reviewer: I'm confused. I was suggesting linking to the PicoBoot repo, not directly to the download. That's completely optional though since you already link the installation instructions.

> You can download ready-to-go firmware featuring IPLBoot directly from PicoBoot. Just follow the [installation guide](https://github.com/webhdx/PicoBoot#-installation-guide). This is likely what you want.

Author: Ah I see. I thought you meant linking directly to the firmware file. Will do.

Otherwise, use `iplboot.dol` and follow the PicoBoot [compiling firmware](https://github.com/webhdx/PicoBoot#compiling-firmware) instructions to flash your Raspberry Pico.

### Qoob Pro

Use `iplboot.gcb` to flash your Qoob Pro as a BIOS.

### Qoob SX

> Qoob SX is not currently supported.

Author: How about?

```suggestion
Qoob SX is not currently supported due to size constraints.

The last version available for the Qoob SX is [r5.2](https://github.com/redolution/iplboot/releases/tag/r5.2). Download [`qoob_sx_iplboot_upgrade.elf`](https://github.com/redolution/iplboot/releases/download/r5.2/qoob_sx_iplboot_upgrade.elf) and flash it to your Qoob SX as a BIOS.
```

> Qoob SX is not currently supported.

Reviewer: I'd rather not link directly to files. The link to the release is enough.

The other thing is that installing to the Qoob SX is a bit more involved than this. If I recall correctly, you need to burn the file to an ISO 9660 disc, and turn on the GC while holding left on the dpad, which will cause the Qoob to boot the fallback BIOS. Then you can run the updater from there.
There are instructions in the Qoob readme, maybe we should copy them here.

> Qoob SX is not currently supported.

Author: Are those instructions available anywhere online we could link to? Otherwise we can probably put the onus of knowing how to use/flash their device on the user.

> Qoob SX is not currently supported.

Reviewer: Other than the archived files on the gcf forum page I linked, I don't think there is a reasonable source that's still online. I prefer copying the instructions here for ease of access.

> Qoob SX is not currently supported.

Author: Updated link. I'll let you cover those instructions then as I have no experience with the device. The NFO file from the Qoob 1.3c release sates:

> This release includes a network / dvd updater. Just run the qoob_13c_upgrade.elf somehow (either by burning as iso9660 to a dvd or by uploading per network).
> 
> If you burn it to a cd, make sure to fill up the dvd to at least 1.2GB of data else the gc drive can't read it.
> 
> ...
> 
> YOU CAN *NOT* BREAK YOUR SX BY FLASHING WRONG FIRMWARE INTO IT.
> 
> The SX has an integrated "backup" bios. You can go into it by holding the D-Pad to the left (D-pad is the small digital pad at the lower left of the controller). Do not boot the disc, you also have to press 'B'.
> 
> You *need* to start the upgrader from this bios. This is done due to protect you from evil applications which could otherwise erase your bios. Still, the backup bios is read only and can't be erased.
> 
> So there's absolutely no way to kill your SX. If you flash something else to it, all it would do is to stop booting until you boot into the recovery bios.
> 
> To summarize it:
> 
>  - Don't panic. You can't break your SX by flashing.
>  - You can't flash .GCB files, you need the .ELF updaters.
>  - To flash via DVD, you need to hold "D-Pad-Left" while booting. Be sure to pad your disc to at least ~1GB of data!
>  - To flash via Network, you need to hold "D-Pad-Left"+"B" while booting. IP address will be 192.168.1.32. There's no way to change that.

> Qoob SX is not currently supported.

Reviewer: Alright, leave the instructions out for now. I'll take care of that later.

> ### Viper

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### ViperGC
```

Use `iplboot.vgc` to flash your Viper as a BIOS.

### GameCube Memory Card

Use `iplboot_xz.gci` and a GameCube memory card manager such as [GCMM](https://github.com/suloku/gcmm) to copy to your memory card. It will be saved as `boot.dol` and can be used in conjunction with the various [save game exploits](https://www.gc-forever.com/wiki/index.php?title=Booting_homebrew#Game_Save_Exploits).

## Troubleshooting

IPLBoot displays useful diagnostic messages as it attempts to load the selected DOL. But it's so fast you may not have time to read or even see them. If you hold the down direction on the D-Pad, the messages will remain on screen until you let go.

## Compiling

> You should only need to compile if you want to modify to the IPLBoot source code. Otherwise, you can just download needed files from the [latest release](https://github.com/redolution/iplboot/releases/latest).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should only need to compile if you want to modify to the IPLBoot source code. Otherwise, you can just download prebuilt binaries from the [latest release](https://github.com/redolution/iplboot/releases/latest).
```

1. Ensure you have the latest version of [devkitPro](https://devkitpro.org/wiki/Getting_Started) installed.
2. Ensure you have the latest version of [libogc2](https://github.com/extremscorner/libogc2) installed (see [instructions](#installing-libogc2) below).
3. Ensure your devkitPro environment variables are set: `DEVKITPRO` and `DEVKITPPC`

> IPLBoot also acts as a server for @emukidid's [usb-load](https://github.com/emukidid/gc-usb-load), should you want to use it for development purposes.

Reviewer: Since this is for homebrew development in general and not just for iplboot itself, I think this belongs under usage.

### PicoBoot

1. Run `make dol`.
2. Follow usage instructions above using the newly created `build/iplboot.dol`.

### Qoob Pro

> 1. Obtain the gc-pal-10 IPL ROM (MD5: `0cdda509e2da83c85bfe423dd87346cc`) and copy it to the root of this project as `ipl.rom`. This is currently the only IPL that has been verified to work.

Reviewer: So the IPL ROM is only needed for BS1, and we've already confirmed that it's identical in all versions. I would just mention that an IPL dump is required, and preferably encourage people to dump their own.
Alternatively, this might require a minor change to the script, but you should be able to use an already built copy of iplboot or an official Qoob BIOS to extract BS1 from.

Author: This is beyond my knowledge and I don't follow the BS1 clarifications. How's this?

```suggestion
1. Obtain an IPL ROM dump and copy it to the root of this project as `ipl.rom`. You can dump your own IPL ROM using tools such as [gc-sd-ipl-dumper](https://github.com/darekasan/gc-sd-ipl-dumper).
```

Reviewer: The IPL is split in two stages, BS1 is the execute-in-place stage which does basic CPU initialization and memory testing/training, BS2 is the actual GameCube menu.
iplboot only provides a replacement for BS2, so we need to use Nintendo's original BS1 as it's the only implementation currently. This is only necessary for Qoob Pro, as the other modchips either provide BS1 another way (Qoob SX), or let the GameCube read it from the original ROM (Viper, PicoBoot).
Qoob Pro BIOS files (original and iplboot) already contain a copy of BS1 so they're a valid source to extract it from.

As for your suggestion, you can dump your IPL with Swiss (just copy the file from the System device). I'd prefer recommending that instead.

Author: Didn't realize you could do that directly from Swiss. How about?
```suggestion
1. Obtain an IPL ROM dump and copy it to the root of this project as `ipl.rom`. You can dump your own IPL ROM using Swiss. Follow [these instructions](https://www.rwiihacks.com/tutorials/nintendont/#optional-dump-gamecube-bios-for-use-with-nintendont) to copy `ipl.bin` from the System device to your SD card. Then rename `ipl.bin` to `ipl.rom`.
```

Reviewer: I don't want to link to some random tutorial site either, especially for something so simple. "Copy ipl.bin from the System device to your SD card" is good enough, Swiss isn't that hard to use.

Author: I had trouble with it. Didn't realize I had to enable file management and Swiss UI is defiantly not the most intuitive.

Last shot. Otherwise I'll just keep it simple as requested.

```suggestion
1. Obtain an IPL ROM dump and copy it to the root of this project as `ipl.rom`. You can dump your own IPL ROM using Swiss:
    - Ensure file management is enabled in Swiss settings: Press B, select gear icon at bottom right, Press R until you reach "Advanced Settings", scroll down to "File Management", press Right to enable, save and exit.
    - Switch to the System device: Select eject icon at bottom left, scroll right to "System", press A.
    - Scroll down to `ipl.bin`, press Z then X, and copy to your SD card.
    - Copy `ipl.bin` from your SD card to the root of this project. Rename it to `ipl.rom`.
```

Reviewer: Fair enough. This looks good. :+1:
I'll also open an issue about allowing usage of an existing build of iplboot to simplify things.

Reviewer: Actually, I just had a look and it should already work. Would you mind giving it a try?

Author: I downloaded `iplboot.gcb` from the r5.2 release and renamed it to `ipl.rom`. `make qoobpro` completed successfully, but I don't have any way of actually testing the binary.

Is that what you were asking?

Reviewer: Yes, can you paste the build log here? And also verify that the output is identical to a build with a real ROM dump.

Author: Yes, the result is identical to using gc-pal-10 IPL ROM `0cdda509e2da83c85bfe423dd87346cc`.

gc-pal-10 IPL ROM:
```zsh
% md5sum ipl.rom
# 0cdda509e2da83c85bfe423dd87346cc  ipl.rom
% make clean qoobpro
# ...
# pack Qoob Pro IPL ... iplboot.gcb
# (C) 1999-2001 Nintendo.  All rights reserved.(C) 1999 ArtX Inc.  All rights reserved.PAL  Revision 1.0
# Entry point:   0x81300000
# Load address:  0x01300000
# Image size:    143072 bytes (139K)
# Qoob blocks:   3
% md5sum build/iplboot.gcb
# b6c746a375431dcf03516f6df6294963  build/iplboot.gcb
```

`iplboot.gcb` from r5.2 release:
```zsh
% md5sum ipl.rom
# 2fb70fc6f8a8500ce78fd5c9b0f95277  ipl.rom
% make clean qoobpro
# ...
# pack Qoob Pro IPL ... iplboot.gcb
# (C) 1999-2001 Nintendo.  All rights reserved.(C) 1999 ArtX Inc.  All rights reserved.PAL  Revision 1.0  
# Entry point:   0x81300000
# Load address:  0x01300000
# Image size:    143072 bytes (139K)
# Qoob blocks:   3
% md5sum build/iplboot.gcb
# b6c746a375431dcf03516f6df6294963  build/iplboot.gcb
```

Reviewer: Great! Then that simplifies the build process a little.

Author: Do we still want to encourage users to dump their own IPL?

If we are already distributing BS1 (as it is contained in iplboot.gcb), should we just include ipl.rom in buildtools? Perhaps same with `qoob_sx_13c_upgrade.elf`?

Reviewer: > Do we still want to encourage users to dump their own IPL?

Like I said above, instruct people to use the prebuilt, but keep the dumping instructions as well. It's better to have both.

> If we are already distributing BS1 (as it is contained in iplboot.gcb), should we just include ipl.rom in buildtools? Perhaps same with `qoob_sx_13c_upgrade.elf`?

No. Distributing BS1 as part of the release binaries is already not very legal, but we don't really have a choice. I don't want to put any copyrighted Nintendo material in the source repo.
The Qoob updater is much less problematic, because they're unlikely to bother us. You can add it to the repo if you want.

Author: Wasn't sure which should be the primary/encouraged method.

```suggestion
Qoob Pro requires IPL BS1 (don't worry if you don't know what that is). This can be obtained from an existing Qoob Pro BIOS or any IPL dump.

To use an existing Qoob Pro BIOS (easiest method):
1. Download `iplboot.gcb` from the [latest release](https://github.com/redolution/iplboot/releases/latest).
2. Rename `iplboot.gcb` to `ipl.rom` and place it at the root of this project.

Alternatively, you can dump the IPL ROM from your own GameCube using Swiss:
1. Ensure file management is enabled in Swiss settings: Press B, select the gear icon at bottom right, press R until you reach "Advanced Settings", scroll down to "File Management", press right to enable, save and exit.
2. Switch to the system device: Select the eject icon at bottom left, scroll right to "System", press A.
3. Scroll down to `ipl.bin`, press Z then X, and copy to your SD card.
4. Copy `ipl.bin` from your SD card to the root of this project. Rename it to `ipl.rom`.

Alternatively, obtain an IPL dump from somewhere else and rename it to `ipl.rom`.

You should now have `ipl.rom` at the project root.

1. Run `make qoobpro`.
2. Follow installation instructions above using the newly created `build/iplboot.gcb`.
```

Reviewer: Looking good.

Author: Pushed

Author: Something I noticed: building `iplboot.gbc` using the IPL I dumped from my GC does not match those built using gc-pal-10 IPL ROM or previous `iplboot.gbc`:

```zsh
% md5sum ipl.rom
# b17148254a5799684c7d783206504926  ipl.rom
% make clean qoobpro
# ...
# pack Qoob Pro IPL ... iplboot.gcb
# (C) 1999-2003 Nintendo.  All rights reserved.(C) 1999 ArtX Inc.  All rights reserved.NTSC Revision 1.2
# Entry point:   0x81300000
# Load address:  0x01300000
# Image size:    143936 bytes (140K)
# Qoob blocks:   3
% md5sum build/iplboot.gcb
# b8df0f8d1386ec32211d0e17b478ef39  build/iplboot.gcb
```

The image size is 864 bytes larger. Not sure if that is expected.

Reviewer: Yes, the version string is different and currently the build script straight up copies it into the output. You can try comparing it with a hex editor, if it's identical after the first 256 bytes then we're all good. I think it would be a good idea to change the header like we already do for the Viper build.

2. Run `make qoobpro`.
3. Follow usage instructions above using the newly created `build/iplboot.gcb`.

### Qoob SX

NOTE: Qoob SX is currently nonfunctional as the resulting BIOS is too large.

1. Ensure dolxz is installed (see [instructions](#installing-dolxz) below).
2. Ensure doltool is installed (see [instructions](#installing-doltool) below).

> 3. Obtain `qoob_sx_13c_upgrade.elf` and copy it to the root of this project. (TODO: MD5 and more details about the file.)

Reviewer: [Qoob (1.3c).rar](https://www.gc-forever.com/forums/download/file.php?id=109)
https://www.gc-forever.com/forums/viewtopic.php?f=36&t=23

Author: Thanks! How about?
```suggestion
3. Download [Qoob BIOS v1.3c](https://www.gc-forever.com/forums/download/file.php?id=109) and extract `qoob_sx_13c_upgrade.elf` (MD5: `2292630e7604bc2ae8bfa4d3e4ba5941`) to the root of this project.
```

Reviewer: Looks good, but again instead of linking directly to the file, link to the page.

Author: Sure thing. Curious though, why not link directly to appropriate files?

Reviewer: Well, in this particular case, the file won't get updated, but the page still provides some context for the file.

2. Follow usage instructions above using the newly created `build/iplboot.vgc`.

### GameCube Memory Card

1. Ensure dol2gci is installed (see [instructions](#installing-dol2gci) below).
2. Run `make gci`.
3. Follow usage instructions above using the newly created `build/iplboot.gci`.

*Optional:* If you want to reduce the file size by ~50% so it will take up less space on your memory card, you can create a compressed version.

1. Ensure dol2gci is installed (see [instructions](#installing-dol2gci) below).
2. Ensure dolxz is installed (see [instructions](#installing-dolxz) below).
3. Run `make gci_compressed`.
4. Follow usage instructions above using the newly created `build/iplboot_xz.gci` (Notice the `_xz` suffix).

### Compressed DOL

Should you need it, you can create a compressed version of the base DOL.

1. Ensure dolxz is installed (see [instructions](#installing-dolxz) below).
2. Run `make dol_compressed`.
3. Follow usage instructions above using the newly created `build/iplboot_xz.dol` (Notice the `_xz` suffix).

## Dependencies

**NOTE:** Some of these are required only in certain scenarios and you may not need them. Check the instructions for your target device first.

> ### Installing libogc2

Reviewer: I'm a bit iffy on providing installation instructions for our dependencies.
I don't see Python 3 listed anywhere, but it's required for all the modchips. I know it's likely to already be installed on most Linux machines, but definitely not on Windows.

Author: You are right. I think we should just link to the repos/download. I'll dump this section and add python to the list.

Should we just add dolxz, dol2gci, and doltool to the repo? Not sure that is best practice, but they are small and it would be convenient.

Reviewer: I don't mind vendoring build tool binaries, that would certainly make things easier. Just make sure to link the source code.

Author: #12 adds binaries to repo. Will remove instructions for installing these.

1. Ensure you have the latest version of [devkitPro](https://devkitpro.org/wiki/Getting_Started) installed.
2. Clone or download the [libogc2 repo](https://github.com/extremscorner/libogc2).
3. Run `make install`.

### Installing dolxz

1. Ensure you have the latest version of [devkitPro](https://devkitpro.org/wiki/Getting_Started) installed.
2. Clone or download the [dolxz repo](https://github.com/yo1dog/dolxz).
3. Run `make`.
4. Ensure the resulting `dolxz` is executable (`chmod +x doltool`).
5. Ensure `dolxz` is accessible from your `PATH` env var.

### Installing dol2gci

> 1. Download from [here](https://github.com/emukidid/swiss-gc/blob/master/buildtools/dol2gci?raw=true). Alternatively, you can clone or download the [swiss repo](https://github.com/emukidid/swiss-gc/tree/master/buildtools) and build yourself.

Reviewer: Don't link directly to Linux binaries. There are Windows versions right alongside them. I haven't personally tested building on Windows but I don't want to make it any harder than necessary.
